# JavaScript

## Background

-   JS designed to be a very flexible language above all else
-   Designed in 9 days, by Brandon Eich, so there are a lot of quirks.
-   Originally designed to make webpages dynamic, but now used for everything!

## Features

-   _Dynamically typed_ (Do not have to decalre type of variables when creating)

```javascript
let x = 100;
let y = "Hello";
```

-   _Loosely typed_ (The datatypes of variables can be coerced implicitly)

```javascript
const sum = true + true + true; // JS will convert the trues into 1s andadd them
```

-   _Interepreted Language_
    -   JS does NOT get compiled and then executed
    -   It is read one line at a time and executed immediately\* after reading that line
-   _High Level Language_
    -   Automatic memory management
    -   Programmers cannot use pointers or making low level memory operations

### ES6

-   ECMAScript6
    -   ECMA organization in charge of JavaScript language specification
    -   European Computer Manufacturers Association
        -   Empty acronym now
        -   When it became really popular in web browsers, they utilized them as a computer regulatory association for awhile. Now all they do is javascript specification.
-   Feature that ES6 added
    -   Arrow notation
    -   Async/await
    -   Classes
    -   Enhanced object literals
    -   String interpolation
    -   Promises
    -   For/of
    -   Const/let
    -   Symbol
    -   modules (import export syntax)

## Primitive Data Types

    -   6 Primitive datatypes
    -   Semantic term. These datatypes are STILL objects
    -   null vs undefined
        -   Null is an explicit value meaning nothing that must be assigned
        -   Undefined is the default value of anything in JS

```javascript
const name = "Adam"; // string
const age = 19; // number
const isTrainer = true; // boolean
const nothing = null; // null(explicitly given)
const undef = undefined; // undefined(default)
// symbol, and never used once
```

### Other Datatypes

-   BigInt is used to hold large integers outside the ability of the standard number variable
-   NaN(not a number) is technically of the data type number. It is returned when a mathematical operation encoutners a problem and cannot retturn a valid number value

### Object Sub-Types:

-   Arrays (big differernce from Java)
    -   Arrays are objects with indicies.
    -   **However, a single** array can hold any number of different data types
    -   their length is **NOT FIXED**
-   Functions are also Types of objects but they have greatly expanded functionality
-   Dates are also a type of object.

## Operators

-   Arithemetic operators
    -   \-
    -   \+
    -   \*
    -   /
    -   %
    -   ++
    ***
-   Comparison
    -   \>
    -   \<
    -   \> = or <=
    -   !=
    -   ==
    -   ===
    -   **_NOTE_**
        -   === will compare types while == will see if two variables of different types share the same value.
-   Logical
    -   &&
    -   ||
    -   !
-   Assignment
    -   =
    -   +=
    -   -=
    -   \*=
    -   %=
-   Ternary
    -   condition ? value1 : value2
        -   This is a one line if statement. if condition is true value1 is the result, if false value 2 is.

## Functions

-   JS in Adam's opinion is a mostly functional programming language
    -   Multi-Paradigmed (cake-salad)
-   Ways to create a function

```javascript
// option 1
function fun() {}

// option 2
const fun = function () {};

// Arrow notation
const fun = () => {};

// if your function takes in one parameter you can omit the parenthesis
const print = (e) => {
	console.log(e);
};

// if function body is one line JS will implicitly return the value and you do not need curly brackets
const add = (a, b) => a + b;
```

-   Invoking functions
    -   you invoke or execute functions using ()
        -   JS does NOT support overloading
            -   The same function name but with different parameters
        -   You can pass any arguments to a function JS will work with it
            -   You can pass too few arguments
            -   You can pass too many arguments
            -   You can pass arguments of improper types (no type checks)
-   Default parameters

```javascript
function greet(name = "Jane Doe") {
	console.log(name);
}
greet("Adam"); // Return: Adam
greet(); // Return: Jane Doe
```

## Scopes in JS

-   Global Scope
    -   Available anywhere in the program
    -   No key word
-   Function Scope
    -   Available anywhere in the function () {}
    -   var
-   Block Scope
    -   Only within the block {}
    -   let or const
        -   _let_ - this variable is the new and preferred declaration for mutable variables.
        -   _const_ - has the same functionality as let but once assigned can not be changed. (think "final" in Java)

```javascript
x = 1000; // global (don't do that)

function sayHello() {
	var greeting = "Hello"; //function
	console.log(greeting);
}

function add(num1, num2) {
	const sum = num1 + num2; // block
	return sum;
}
```

## Hoisting

-   All functions when executed go through a two pass system
-   JS will read through the function and assign a default of undefined to all var variables
    -   BEFORE actually executing the code
-   You can use a var variable before it's actually defined.
-   You can't do this with let or const

## Strict Mode

-   Declare "use strict"
    -   in JS this means that you will not be allowed to do the follow:
        -   use defined variables
        -   any keywords as variable or function names
        -   restricts some of the other niche instances
        -   removes some os JS "quirks"
    -   implemented in

## Object Literals

-   Objects are just a collection of key value pairs
    -   Together a key-value pair is known as a _property_
-   Objects do not need to be created from a class. Classes did not exist for a LONG time in JS.
-   Objects are always mutable.
    -   Always add, edit or remove properties.
-   **Object Literal** is the most common way to create an object

```javascript
const dog = { name: "Rover", owner: "Adam" }; // object literal
// you can access utilizing these two notations

// dot notation
dog.name;

// bracket notation
dog["name"];

// Enhanced For loop
// for in loop iterates over

for (const key in dog) {
	console.log(dog[key]);
}
```

-   Objects do have a \_\_proto\_\_ property that points to its Parent object and can inherit the parent object's properties.

-   **Enhanced Object Literal**
    -   Alternate syntax for objects

```javascript
const dog = {
	name: "Rover",
	bark() {
		console.log("BORK");
	}
};
```

## Truthy Falsy

-   JS has extremely aggressive type coercion
-   Every value in JS has an inherit _truthiness_
-   All values are true except for a handful of falsy values
    -   The falsy values imply some kind of non-existence

```javascript
const emptyString = "";
const zero = 0;
const nothing = null;
const undefined = undefined;
const f = false;
const notANumber = NaN;
```

-   == vs ===
    -   == loose equality operator
        -   Only checks if the values are the same and will do type coercion
    -   === strict equality operator
        -   Check both the type AND value are equivalenT
        -   USE this 99% of the time.

## Arrays

-   Arrays in JS are used to store many values
-   Arrays can store any datatype
-   Arrays automatically resize themselves

```javascript
const stuff = [10, 20, "Hello", true, null, { fname: "Adam" }];

for (let i = 0; stuff.lenth > i; i++) {
	console.log(stuff[i]);
}

// Enhanced For loop
// for of loop

for (const item of stuff) {
	console.log(item);
}
```

-   Methods on the array object you should know
    -   push(element)
    -   pop()
    -   filter(callback)
    -   map(callback)

## Functional Programming

-   Paradigm of programming
    -   Paradigm: style, way of thinking
    -   Other paradigms
        -   OOP
        -   Declarative
        -   Imperative
-   Places a heavy emphasis on funcitons
-   Analogous to Java methods
-   The core tenent of any functional programming language is **_functions are objects_**
-   Functions are first class citizens and can be stored in variables, passed around in functions, dynamically created just like any other value
-   Core terminology
    -   **Callback Function**
        -   A function passed as a _parameter_ to another function
    -   **Higher order function**
        -   A function that takes _in_ a function as a parameter
    -   **Anonymous Function**
        -   A function defined 'on the spot' and was never stored in a variable or given a name
    -   **Method**
        -   A function that is attached to an Object
    -   **Constructor Functions**
        -   Functions that create a new object
        -   Use the new keyword
        -   capitalized by convention
    -   **Closure**
        -   A function that returns a function
        -   The returned function still has access to variables there were created in the outer function

```javascript
// Higher order function
function higherOrderFunction(callback){
    callback();
};

const num = [10,20,30,50];
nums.forEach(n=>{console.log(n)}); // anonmyous callback function

// Method

const adam = {
    fname:"Adam";
    introduceSelf: function(){ //method
        console.log(this.name);
    }
}

// Constructor Function
function Person(name,age){
    this.name = name;
    this.age = age;
}

const hank = new Person("Hank", 30)

function outer(){
    let counter = 0; // counter gets "enclosed" in the inner function

    function inner(){
        counter++;
        console.log(counter);
    }

    return inner;
}
const in = outer();
in() //increased counter

const in2 = outer();
in2() // seperate counter variable
```

## Asynchronous Programming

-   JS is a single threaded event driven programming langauge
-   JS can only do one thing at a time
-   The Event Queue is where 'EVENTS' are stored. JS will process these events as they occur.
    -   An express web server is a good example of an event driven program
    -   JS is literally just listening waiting for an HTTP request
    -   Then when an event DOES happen it responds with a function
-   The problem with this system is that sometimes your code has to interact with files or external resources. IF it waited around to finish those external resources, it would significantly slow down your program.
    -   Analogy:
        -   If you had to set up a party:
            1. Put out some silverware
            2. Clean up the living room
            3. Order a pizza
                - Asynchronously handle
                - We do not literally stop moving and wait 30min for it to arrive
                - We move onto things that we can handle
            4. Put out some drinks
            5. Put the cats in the guest bedroom
-   **Promises**
    -   Some functions return promises which are "empty objects"(pending)
    -   Promises will eventually have a value
        -   Fulfilled
        -   Rejected (error is thrown)

```javascript
const promise = readFile("data.txt"); // returns a promise
promise.then(callback).catch(errorHandlerCallback);

async function getData() {
	const data = await readFile("data.txt"); // data would be a fulfilled promise
}
```
## Node JS

-   Node JS is a runtime environment for JS
    -   Node is more like the JVM (Java Virtual Machine) than anything sort of software framework
    -   It just executes JS code and that's all
-   JS used to only be on the browser
-   Node can be used to create web servers, as well as any other type of program
-   Based on the Chrome V8 engine.
-   Every node project has a main configuration file called a **_package.json_**
    -   name of project
    -   author
    -   description
    -   dependencies
    -   scripts
-   **npm** is node package manager
    -   The main tool for creating node projects
    -   installing and managing dependencies
-   npm repository
    -   An online repository of JS code
-   Important node commands

```bash
    # creating a node project
    npm init

    # installing a dependency
    npm i {$dependency}
    npm i express

    # running a script defined in a package.json
    npm run {$scriptname}
    npm run start
    npm run prestart
```
